# Model Theory

In mathematics, **model theory** is the study of the **relationship between formal theories** (a collection of sentences in a formal language expressing statements about a mathematical structure), **and their models**, taken as interpretations that satisfy the sentences of that theory.  
Model theory recognizes and is intimately concerned with a **duality**: it examines **semantical** elements (**meaning and truth**) by means of **syntactical elements** (**formulas and proofs**) of a corresponding language.

### Set theory
Set theory (which is expressed in a countable language), if it is consistent, has a countable model; this is known as **Skolem's paradox**, since there are sentences in set theory which postulate the existence of uncountable sets and yet these sentences are true in our countable model. Particularly the proof of the independence of the continuum hypothesis requires considering sets in models which appear to be uncountable when viewed from within the model, but are countable to someone outside the model.

The model-theoretic viewpoint has been useful in set theory; for example in Kurt Gödel's work on the constructible universe, which, along with the method of forcing developed by Paul Cohen can be shown to prove the (again philosophically interesting) independence of the axiom of choice and the continuum hypothesis from the other axioms of set theory.

In the other direction, model theory itself can be formalized within ZFC set theory. The development of the fundamentals of model theory (such as the compactness theorem) rely on the axiom of choice, or more exactly the Boolean prime ideal theorem. Other results in model theory depend on set-theoretic axioms beyond the standard ZFC framework. For example, if the Continuum Hypothesis holds then every countable model has an ultrapower which is saturated (in its own cardinality). Similarly, if the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis holds then every model has a saturated elementary extension. Neither of these results are provable in ZFC alone. Finally, some questions arising from model theory (such as compactness for infinitary logics) have been shown to be equivalent to large cardinal axioms. 